---
title: Gaussian Measures, Part 2 - The Multivariate Case
subtitle: A fairly deep dive into Gaussian measures in finitely many dimensions. The next step in building up to the infinite-dimensional case.
layout: default
date: 2024-05-19
keywords: GP, Prob-Theory
published: true
---


## Preliminaries
{% katexmm %}
Let $x, y \in \mathbb{R}^n$. Throughout this post,
we write $\langle x, y \rangle = x^\top y$ for the standard
inner product on $\mathbb{R}^n$, and $\lVert x \rVert_2 = \sqrt{\langle x, x \rangle}$
the norm induced by this inner product. We will frequently consider linear
functions of the form $\ell: \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}$, and denote the set
of all such functions as $(\mathbb{R}^n)^*$. Every
$\ell \in (\mathbb{R}^n)^*$ can be uniquely represented as an inner product
with some vector $y \in \mathbb{R}^n$. When we wish to make this identification
explicit, we will write $\ell_y$ to denote the linear map given by
$\ell_y(x) = \langle x, y \rangle$. Likewise, if we are working with a generic
linear map $\ell \in (\mathbb{R}^n)^*$, then we will write $y_{\ell} \in \mathbb{R}^n$
to denote the unique vector satisfying $\ell(x) = \langle x, y_{\ell} \rangle$.
We will also loosely refer to $\ell_y(x)$ as a *projection* onto $y$.
Note that if $y$ has unit norm, then this is precisely the magnitude of the
orthogonal projection of $x$ onto $y$.
{% endkatexmm %}

## Sigma Algebra
{% katexmm %}
We recall from the previous post that a univariate Gaussian measure is defined
on the Borel $\sigma$-algebra $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$. Analogously, we
will define an $n$-dimensional Gaussian measure on the Borel sets
$\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^n)$. There are two reasonable approaches
to define $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^n)$, and I want to take a moment to highlight
them since the same two options will present themselves when we consider
defining the Borel sets over infinite-dimensional spaces.

### Option 1: Leverage the Standard Topology on $\mathbb{R}^n$
A Borel $\sigma$-algebra can be defined for any space that comes equipped with
a topology; i.e., a collection of open sets. The Borel $\sigma$-algebra is then
defined as the smallest $\sigma$-algebra that contains all of these open sets.
In the present setting, this means
$$
\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^n)
:= \sigma\left\{\mathcal{O} \subseteq \mathbb{R}^n : \mathcal{O} \text{ is open} \right\}, \tag{1}
$$
where $\sigma(\mathcal{S})$ denotes the $\sigma$-algebra generated by a collection
of sets $\mathcal{S}$. A nice perspective on $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^n)$ is
that it is the smallest $\sigma$-algebra that ensures all continuous
functions $f: \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}$ are measurable. We note that this is
*not* a property of Borel $\sigma$-algebras more generally, but one
that does hold in the special case of $\mathbb{R}^n$; see
[this](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/3952771/borel-sigma-algebra-and-measurability-of-continuous-functions?rq=1) StackExchange post for some details.


### Option 2: Product of One-Dimensional Borel Sets
A second reasonable approach is to try extending what we have already defined
in one dimension, which means simply taking Cartesian products of one-dimensional
Borel sets:
$$
\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^n)
:= \sigma\left\{B_1 \times \cdots \times B_n: B_i \in \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}), \ i = 1, \dots, n \right\}. \tag{2}
$$
It turns out that the resulting $\sigma$-algebra agrees with that defined
in option 1, so there is no ambiguity in the notation.
{% endkatexmm %}

## Definition: One-Dimensional Projections
{% katexmm %}
With the $\sigma$-algebra defined, we now consider how to define a Gaussian
measure $\mu$ on the measurable space $(\mathbb{R}^n, \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^n))$.
We will explore a few different equivalent definitions, starting with this:
a measure is Gaussian if all of its one-dimensional projections are
(univariate) Gaussians.
<blockquote>
  <p><strong>Definition.</strong>
  A probability measure $\mu$ defined on the Borel measurable space
  $(\mathbb{R}^n, \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^n))$ is called <strong>Gaussian</strong>
  if, for all linear maps $\ell \in (\mathbb{R}^n)^*$, the pushforward measure
  $\mu \circ \ell^{-1}$ is Gaussian on $(\mathbb{R}, \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}))$.
  </p>
</blockquote>

As in the univariate setting, we define a random variable $X$ as Gaussian
if its law $X$ is a Gaussian measure. Recall that each linear map $\ell$
can be identified with a unique $y \in \mathbb{R}^n$ such that
$\ell(x) = \langle x, y \rangle$, which we indicate by writing
$\ell_y = \ell$. We thus see that $\mu \circ \ell_{y}^{-1}$ is the
distribution of the random variable $\langle X, y \rangle$. The previous
definition can therefore be re-stated in the language of random variables
as follows: an $n$-dimensional random variable is Gaussian if every linear
combination of the entries of $X$ is univariate Gaussian. More precisely:
<blockquote>
  <p><strong>Definition.</strong>
  Let $(\Omega, \mathcal{A}, \mathbb{P})$ be a a probability space and
  $X: \Omega \to \mathbb{R}^n$ a random vector. Then $X$ is called
  <strong>Gaussian</strong> if $\langle X, y \rangle$ is a univariate Gaussian
  random variable for all $y \in \mathbb{R}^n$.
  </p>
</blockquote>
Notice that by choosing $y := e_j$ (the vector with a $1$ in its $j^{\text{th}}$
entry and zeros everywhere else), then this definition immediately tells us that
a Gaussian random vector has univariate  Gaussian marginal distributions.
That is, if $X = (X_1, \dots, X_n)^\top$ then $X_i$ is univariate Gaussian
for all $i = 1, \dots, n$.
{% endkatexmm %}

## Fourier Transform
{% katexmm %}
Just as in the univariate case, the Fourier transform $\hat{\mu}$ provides
an alternate, equivalent, characterization of Gaussian measures. First, we
recall how such a Fourier transform is defined in the multiple variable
setting.
<blockquote>
  <p><strong>Definition.</strong>
  Let $\mu$ be a measure on $(\mathbb{R}^n, \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^n))$.
  Then the Fourier transform of $\mu$ is defined as
  $$
  \hat{\mu}(y) := \int_{\mathbb{R}^n} e^{i\langle x, y\rangle} \mu(dx),
  \qquad y \in \mathbb{R}^n \tag{3}
  $$
  </p>
</blockquote>
We can alternatively view $\hat{\mu}$ as a function of
$\ell_y \in (\mathbb{R}^n)^*$;
that is,
$$
\ell_y \mapsto \int_{\mathbb{R}^n} e^{i \ell_y(x)} \mu(dx).
$$
Note that this is similar in spirit to the definition of the $n$-dimensional
Gaussian measure, in the sense that the extension from one to multiple
dimensions is acheived by considering one-dimensional linear projections.
This idea will also provide the basis for an extension to infinite dimensions.

With this background established, we can state the following, which gives
an alternate definition of Gaussian measures.
<blockquote>
  <p><strong>Theorem.</strong>
  A probability measure $\mu$ defined on the Borel measurable space
  $(\mathbb{R}^n, \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^n))$ is Gaussian if and only
  if its Fourier transform is of the form
  $$
  \hat{\mu}(y) = \exp\left\{i\langle m, y\rangle - \frac{1}{2}\langle Cy, y\rangle \right\}, \tag{4}
  $$
  for some fixed vector $m \in \mathbb{R}^{n}$ and symmetric, positive
  semi-definite matrix $C \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times n}$.
  </p>
</blockquote>
The proof, which is given in the appendix, also provides the expressions for
the mean and covariance of $\mu$ as a byproduct.
<blockquote>
  <p><strong>Corollary.</strong>
  Let $\mu$ be a Gaussian measure with Fourier transform
  $\hat{\mu}(y) = \exp\left\{\langle y, m\rangle - \frac{1}{2}\langle Cy, y\rangle\right\}$. Then the mean vector and covariance matrix of $\mu$ are
  given by
  \begin{align}
  m &= \int x \mu(dx) \tag{5} \newline
  C &= \int (x-m)(x-m)^\top \mu(dx).
  \end{align}
  </p>
</blockquote>

{% endkatexmm %}

## Density Function
The one-dimensional projections and Fourier transform provide equivalent
definitions of multivariate Gaussian measures.
The more familiar notion of the Gaussian density provides a third characterization,
with the caveat that it only pertains to the case that the covariance matrix
$C$ is positive definite.
<blockquote>
  <p><strong>Proposition.</strong>
  Let $\mu$ be a Gaussian measure with mean vector $m$ and
  covariance matrix $C$, as in (5). Then $\mu$ admits
  a Lebesgue density if and only if $C$ is positive definite, in which case
  $$
  \frac{d\mu}{d\lambda}(x)
  = \text{det}(2\pi C)^{-1/2}\exp\left\{-\frac{1}{2} \langle C^{-1}(x-m), x-m\rangle\right\}. \tag{6}
  $$
  </p>
</blockquote>

## Transformation of Standard Gaussian Random Variables
In this section we provide yet another characterization of Gaussian measures.
We consider a *generative* perspective, whereby a Gaussian random vector
$X \in \mathbb{R}^n$ arises via a linear transformation of $n$ iid
$\mathcal{N}(0,1)$ random variables.  
<blockquote>
  <p><strong>Proposition.</strong>
  Let $Z_1, \dots, Z_n$ be iid $\mathcal{N}(0, 1)$ random variables stacked into
  the column vector $Z \in \mathbb{R}^n$. Then, for any fixed vector
  $m \in \mathbb{R}^n$ and matrix $A \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times n}$, the random
  variable given by
  $$
  X := m + AZ \tag{7}
  $$
  has a Gaussian distribution $\mathcal{N}(m, AA^\top)$.

  Conversely, let $X \in \mathbb{R}^n$ be a Gaussian random variable. Then
  there exists a vector $m \in \mathbb{R}^n$ and matrix $A \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times n}$
  such that $X = m + AZ$.
  </p>
</blockquote>

{% katexmm %}
Another way to think about this is that we have defined a *transport map*
$T: \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}^n$ such that
\begin{align}
T(Z) &= X, &&\text{where } T(z) = m + Az.
\end{align}
That is, we feed in vectors with iid standard Gaussian components, and get out
vectors with distribution $\mathcal{N}(m, AA^\top)$. This is a very practical
way to look at multivariate Gaussians, immediately providing the basis for
a sampling algorithm. Indeed, suppose we want to draw iid samples from
the distribution $\mathcal{N}(m, C)$. Then the above proposition gives us a
way to do so, provided that we can (1) draw univariate $\mathcal{N}(0,1)$
samples; and (2) factorize the matrix $C$ as $C = AA^\top$ for some $A$. This
procedure is summarized in the below corollary.

<blockquote>
  <p><strong>Corollary.</strong>
  The following algorithm produces a sample from the distribution
  $\mathcal{N}(m, C)$. <br>

  1. Draw $n$ iid samples $Z_i \sim \mathcal{N}(0,1)$ and stack them in a column
  vector $Z$.  <br>
  2. Compute a factorization $C = AA^\top$.  <br>
  3. Return $m + AZ$.  <br>

  Repeating steps 1 and 3 will produce independent samples from $\mathcal{N}(m, C)$
  (the matrix factorization need not be re-computed each time).  
  </p>
</blockquote>
As for the factorization, the [Cholesky decomposition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cholesky_decomposition)
is a standard choice when $C$ is positive definite.
When $C$ is only positive semidefinite,
the eigendecomposition provides another option, since
$$
C = UDU^\top = UD^{1/2} D^{1/2} U^\top = (UD^{1/2})(UD^{1/2})^\top
$$
so setting $A := UD^{1/2}$ does the trick. Note that $C$ is positive semidefinite
so $D$ is just a diagonal matrix with nonnegative values on the diagonal.

{% endkatexmm %}


## Covariance Operator
{% katexmm %}
As shown in (5) (and derived in the appendix), the covariance matrix associated with
a Gaussian measure $\mu$ satisfies
\begin{align}
C &= \int (x - m)(x - m)^\top \mu(dx),
\end{align}
where $m$ and $C$ are the quantities given in the Fourier transform (4). We take
a step further in this section by viewing the covariance as an operator rather
than a matrix. Definitions of the covariance operator differ slightly across various
textbooks and literature; we will try to touch on the different conventions here
and explain their connections. As a starting point, we consider the following
definition.
<blockquote>
  <p><strong>Definition.</strong>
  Let $\mu$ be a Gaussian measure with Fourier transform given by (4). Then
  the <strong>covariance operator</strong> of $\mu$ is defined as the function
  $\mathcal{C}: \mathbb{R}^n \times \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}$ given by
  $$
  \mathcal{C}\left(y, y^\prime \right) = \langle Cy, y^\prime\rangle. \tag{9}
  $$
  </p>
</blockquote>
We immediately have a variety of equivalent expressions for this operator:
\begin{align}
\mathcal{C}\left(y, y^\prime \right)
&= \langle Cy, y^\prime\rangle \newline
&= y^\top \left[\int (x - m)(x - m)^\top \mu(dx)\right] y^\prime \newline
&= \int \langle y, x - m\rangle \langle y^\prime, x - m \rangle \mu(dx). \tag{10}
\end{align}
In terms of the random variable $X \sim \mu$, we can also write this as
\begin{align}
\mathcal{C}\left(y, y^\prime \right)
&= \int \langle y, x - m\rangle \langle y^\prime, x - m \rangle \mu(dx) \newline
&= \int \left(\langle y, x\rangle - \langle y, \mathbb{E}[X]\rangle\right)
\left(\langle y^\prime, x\rangle - \langle y^\prime, \mathbb{E}[X]\rangle\right) \mu(dx) \newline
&= \mathbb{E}\left[\left(\langle y, x\rangle - \mathbb{E} \langle y,X\rangle\right)
\left(\langle y^\prime, x\rangle - \mathbb{E} \langle y^\prime,X\rangle\right)\right] \newline
&= \text{Cov}\left[\langle y,X\rangle, \langle y^\prime,X\rangle \right].
\end{align}
In words, the covariance operator $\mathcal{C}\left(y, y^\prime \right)$ outputs
the covariance between the one dimensional projections of $X$ along the directions
$y$ and $y^\prime$. Given that the multivariate Gaussian measure is defined in terms
of its one-dimensional projections, this should feel fairly natural.
In fact, we see that the Fourier transform of $\mu$ can be written as
$$
\hat{\mu}(y) = \exp\left\{i\langle y, m\rangle - \frac{1}{2}\mathcal{C}(y,y) \right\}.
$$
When the same argument is fed into both slots of
the covariance operator (as is the case in the Fourier transform expression above),
the result is seen to correspond to the variance of
the one-dimensional projection:
$$
\mathcal{C}(y,y) = \text{Var}\left[\langle y, X\rangle \right].
$$

### Inner Products
One feature that makes the covariance operator a convenient
mathematical object to study is the inner product structure it provides.
Indeed, the following result states that the covariance operator is
*almost* an inner product, and is a true inner product when the covariance
matrix $C$ is positive definite.
<blockquote>
  <p><strong>Proposition.</strong>
  Let $\mu$ be a Gaussian measure with Fourier transform given by (4). Then
  the covariance operator (9) is symmetric, bilinear, and positive semidefinite.
  If $C$, the covariance matrix of $\mu$, is positive definite, then the covariance
  operator is also positive definite and thus defines an inner product.  
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Proof.**
Bilinearity follows immediately from definition (9). Symmetry similarly follows,
and is more immediately obvious in expression (10). Since $C$ is positive
semidefinite, then
$$
\mathcal{C}(y,y) = \langle Cy, y\rangle \geq 0,
$$
so $\mathcal{C}$ is also positive semidefinite. The inequality is strict when
$C$ is positive definite and $y \new 0$, in which case $\mathcal{C}(\cdot, \cdot)$
is an inner product. $\qquad \blacksquare$

We can therefore think of $\mathcal{C}$ as defining a new inner product by
weighting the Euclidean inner product by a positive definite matrix $C$.

### Alternative Definition
As mentioned above, definitions of the covariance operator very slightly in the
literature. One basic modification commonly seen is to assume that $\mu$ is
centered (zero mean) and thus define the covariance operator as
$$
\mathcal{C}(y, y^\prime) := \int \langle y, x\rangle \langle y^\prime, x\rangle \mu(dx). \tag{12}
$$
This is done primarily for convenience, as one can always center a Gaussian
measure and then add back the mean when needed. Indeed, assume we are working
with a Gaussian measure with mean $m$. To apply (12), we center the measure, which
formally means considering the pushforward $\nu := \mu \circ T^{-1}$ where
$T(x) := x - m$. Using sub-scripts to indicate the measure associated with
each operator, we apply the change-of-variables theorem to obtain
\begin{align}
\mathcal{C}_{\nu}(y, y^\prime)
&= \int \langle y, x\rangle \langle y^\prime, x\rangle (\mu \circ T^{-1})(dx) \newline
&= \int \langle y, T(x)\rangle \langle y^\prime, T(x)\rangle \mu(dx) \newline
&= \int \langle y, x-m \rangle \langle y^\prime, x-m \rangle \mu(dx),
\end{align}
which we see agrees with (10), our (uncentered) definition of $\mathcal{C}$.
Thus, our original definition (10) can be thought of as first centering the
measure and then applying (12).


### Dual Space Interpretation
As we have done repeatedly throughout this post, we can identify
$\mathbb{R}^n$ with its dual $(\mathbb{R}^n)^*$. This may seem needlessly pedantic
in the present context, but becomes necessary when defining Gaussian measures
on infinite-dimensional spaces. The expression (10) provides the natural jumping
off point for reinterpreting the covariance operator as acting on
linear functionals. To this end, we can consider re-defining the covariance
operator as
$\mathcal{C}: (\mathbb{R}^n)^* \times (\mathbb{R}^n)^* \to \mathbb{R}$, where
$$
\mathcal{C}(\ell, \ell^\prime)
:= \int \ell(x-m) \ell^\prime(x-m) \mu(dx). \tag{11}
$$
By identifying each $y \in \mathbb{R}^n$ with its dual vector
$\ell_y \in (\mathbb{R}^n)^*$, this definition is seen to agree with (9).
Note that $\ell$ and $\ell^\prime$ are linear, so we could have
equivalently defined $\mathcal{C}$ as
$$
\mathcal{C}(\ell, \ell^\prime)
:= \int (\ell(x)-\ell(m)) (\ell^\prime(x)-\ell(m)) \mu(dx).
$$

The dual space interpretation also leads naturally to a closely-related operator.  
<blockquote>
  <p><strong>Definition.</strong>
  Let $\mu$ be a Gaussian measure with Fourier transform given by (4) and
  covariance operator $\mathcal{C}$. We define the linear operator
  $\mathcal{C}^\prime: \mathbb{R}^n \to (\mathbb{R}^n)^*$ by
  $$
  \mathcal{C}^\prime(y)(\cdot) := \mathcal{C}(y, \cdot)
  = \langle Cy, \cdot\rangle = \ell_{Cy}(\cdot)    \tag{12}
  $$
  </p>
</blockquote>
While this is sometimes also called the covariance operator, to avoid confusion
we reserve this term for $\mathcal{C}$. Note that $\mathcal{C}$ maps an input
$y$ to a *linear functional* $\ell_{Cy}$. Once again, we can think of instead
defining the domain of $\mathcal{C}^\prime$ to be $(\mathbb{R}^n)^*$, which
gives
$$
\mathcal{C}^\prime(\ell)(\ell^\prime)
:= \mathcal{C}(\ell, \ell^\prime)
= \int \ell(x-m) \ell^\prime(x-m) \mu(dx).    \tag{13}
$$
Notice that in this case $\mathcal{C}^\prime$ maps a dual vector $\ell$ to
a *double* dual vector $\ell^\prime \mapsto \mathcal{C}(\ell, \ell^\prime)$;
that is,
$$
\mathcal{C}^\prime: (\mathbb{R}^n)^* \to (\mathbb{R}^n)^{**}.
$$
Since $(\mathbb{R}^n)^{**}$ is isomorphic to $\mathbb{R}^n$, this change of
perspective is not very consequential in the finite-dimensional setting, but
such subtleties become more important in infinite dimensions.  
{% endkatexmm %}


## Conditional Distributions

## Appendix

### Proof of (4): Fourier Transform Characterization
{% katexmm %}
Assume that the probability measure $\mu$ has a Fourier transform given by
$$
\hat{\mu}(y) = \exp\left\{i \langle m, y\rangle - \frac{1}{2}\langle Cy, y\rangle \right\},
$$
for some nonrandom vector $m \in \mathbb{R}^n$ and symmetric positive semidefinite
matrix $C \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times n}$. We must show that the pushforward
$\mu \circ \ell_y^{-1}$ is Gaussian for an arbitrary
$\ell_y \in \left(\mathbb{R}^n\right)^*$. We will do so by invoking the known
form of the Fourier transform for univariate Gaussians. To this end, let
$t \in \mathbb{R}$ and consider
\begin{align}
\mathcal{F}\left(\mu \circ \ell_y^{-1}\right)(t)
&= \int e^{its} \left(\mu \circ \ell_y^{-1} \right)(ds) \newline
&= \int e^{it \ell_y(x)} \mu(dx) \newline
&= \int e^{i \langle ty, x\rangle} \mu(dx) \newline
&= \hat{\mu}(ty) \newline
&= \exp\left(i \langle m, ty\rangle - \frac{1}{2}\langle C(ty), ty\rangle \right) \newline
&= \exp\left(it \langle m, y\rangle - \frac{1}{2}t^2\langle Cy, y\rangle \right),
\end{align}
where the second equality uses the change-of-variables formula, and the final
uses the assumed form of $\hat{\mu}$. Also recall the alternate notation for
the Fourier transform: $\hat{\mu}(y) = \mathcal{F}(\mu)(y)$.
We recognize the final expression above as
the Fourier transform of a univariate Gaussian measure with mean
$\langle y, m\rangle$ and variance $\langle Cy, y\rangle$, evaluated at
frequency $t$. This implies that $\mu \circ \ell_y^{-1}$ is Gaussian. Since
$\ell_y \in \left(\mathbb{R}^n \right)^*$ was arbitrary, it follows by definition
that $\mu$ is Gaussian.

Conversely, assume that $\mu$ is Gaussian. Then, $\mu \circ \ell_y^{-1}$ is
univariate Gaussian for all $\ell_y \in \left(\mathbb{R}^n \right)^*$. We must
show that $\hat{\mu}$ assumes the claimed form. Letting $y \in \mathbb{R}^n$,
we have
\begin{align}
\hat{\mu}(y)
&= \int e^{i \langle y, x\rangle} \mu(dx) \newline
&= \int e^{is} \left(\mu \circ \ell_y^{-1}\right)(ds) \newline
&= \mathcal{F}\left(\mu \circ \ell_y^{-1}\right)(1) \newline
&= \exp\left(i m(y) - \frac{1}{2}\sigma^2(y) \right),
\end{align}
where $m(y)$ and $\sigma^2(y)$ are the mean and variance of $\mu \circ \ell_y^{-1}$,
respectively. The first equality again uses the change-of-variables formula, while
the last expression follows from the assumption that $\mu \circ \ell_y^{-1}$
is Gaussian, and hence must have a Fourier transform of this form. It remains
to verify that $m(y) = \langle y, m\rangle$ and
$\sigma^2(y) = \langle Cy, y\rangle$ to complete the proof. By definition, the  
mean of $\mu \circ \ell_y^{-1}$ is given by
\begin{align}
m(y) &= \int \ell_y(x) \mu(dx) \newline
&= \int \langle y, x\rangle \mu(dx) \newline
&= \left\langle y, \int x \mu(dx) \right\rangle \newline
&=: \langle y, m \rangle,
\end{align}
where we have used the linearity of integration and defined the nonrandom
vector $m := \int x \mu(dx)$. Now, for the variance we have
\begin{align}
\sigma^2(y)
&= \int \left[\ell_y(x) - m(y) \right]^2 \mu(dx) \newline
&= \int \left[\langle y, x\rangle - \langle y, m \rangle \right]^2 \mu(dx) \newline
&= \int \langle y, x-m\rangle^2 \mu(dx) \newline
&= y^\top \left[\int (x-m)(x-m)^\top \mu(dx) \right] y \newline
&=: y^\top C y \newline
&= \langle Cy, y \rangle.
\end{align}
Note that $\sigma^2(y)$ is the expectation of a nonnegative quantity, so
$\langle Cy, y \rangle \geq 0$ for all $y \in \mathbb{R}^n$; i.e.,  
$C$ is positive semidefinite. We have thus shown that
\begin{align}
\hat{\mu}(y) &= \exp\left(\langle y, m\rangle - \frac{1}{2}\langle Cy,y\rangle \right),
\end{align}
with $C$ a positive semidefinite matrix, as required. $\qquad \blacksquare$
{% endkatexmm %}

### Proof of (6): Density Function
{% katexmm %}
Let's start by assuming $\mu$ is a Gaussian measure with mean $m$ and
positive definite covariance matrix $C$. Then $C$ admits an eigendecomposition
$C = UDU^\top$ where the columns $u_1, \dots, u_n$ of $U$ are orthonormal and
$D = \text{diag}\left(\lambda_1, \dots, \lambda_n\right)$ with
$\lambda_1 \geq \lambda_2 \geq \cdots \lambda_n > 0$. Then by definition of a
Gaussian measure, the one-dimensional projections $\mu \circ \ell^{-1}_{u_i}$
are Gaussian, with respective means $\langle m, u_i\rangle$ and variances
$\langle Cu_i, u_i\rangle = \langle \lambda_i u_i, u_i\rangle = \lambda_i > 0$
(see the above proof for the derivation of the mean and variance). Note that
the positive definite assumption ensures that the variances are all strictly
positive. Since the variances are positive, each of these univariate Gaussians
admits a density
$$
\frac{d\left(\mu \circ \ell^{-1}_{u_i}\right)}{d\lambda}(t)
= \exp\left\{-\frac{1}{2\lambda_i}\left(t - \langle m, u_i\rangle \right)^2\right\},
$$
for $i = 1, \dots, n$. We will now show that $\mu$ can be written as the
product of $n$ independent univariate Gaussian measures. We will
leverage the Fourier transform to establish this fact. Letting $y \in \mathbb{R}^n$,
we will lighten notation by writing $\alpha_i := \langle y, u_i\rangle$ and
$\beta_i := \langle m, u_i \rangle$; $y$ and $m$ can thus be represented with
respect to the eigenbasis as
\begin{align}
&y = \sum_{i=1}^{n} \alpha_i u_i, &m = \sum_{i=1}^{n} \beta_i u_i.
\end{align}
Taking the Fourier transform of $\mu$, we have
\begin{align}
\hat{\mu}(y)
&= \exp\left(i\langle y,m\rangle - \frac{1}{2}\langle Cy,y\rangle \right) \newline
&= \exp\left(i\left\langle \sum_{i=1}^{n} \alpha_i u_i, \sum_{i=1}^{n} \beta_i u_i  \right\rangle - \frac{1}{2}\left\langle \sum_{i=1}^{n} \alpha_i Cu_i, \sum_{i=1}^{n} \alpha_i u_i \right\rangle \right) \newline
&= \exp\left(i\sum_{i=1}^{n} \alpha_i \beta_i - \frac{1}{2}\sum_{i=1}^{n}\lambda_i \alpha_i^2 \right) \newline
&= \prod_{i=1}^{n} \exp\left(i\alpha_i \beta_i - \frac{1}{2}\lambda_i \alpha_i^2 \right) \newline
&= \prod_{i=1}^{n} \mathcal{F}\left(\mathcal{N}(\beta_i, \lambda_i) \right)(\alpha_i).
\end{align}

### Proof of (7): Transformation of Standard Gaussian
For completeness, we start by proving the following basic fact.

<blockquote>
  <p><strong>Lemma.</strong>
  Let $Z_i \overset{iid}{\sim} \mathcal{N}(0, 1)$ and define the random vector
  $Z := \begin{bmatrix} Z_1, \dots, Z_n \end{bmatrix}^\top$. Then the law of
  $Z$ is multivariate Gaussian, in particular $\mathcal{N}(0, I)$.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Proof.** Let $\mu$ and $\nu$ denote the law of $Z$ and $Z_i$, respectively.
Observe that $\mu$ is the product measure constructed from $n$ copies of
$\nu$; that is, $\mu = \nu \otimes \cdots \otimes \nu$. We will establish the
Gaussianity of $\mu$ by appealing to the Fourier transform. Let $y \in \mathbb{R}^n$
and consider
\begin{align}
\hat{\mu}(y)
&= \int e^{i \langle y, x\rangle} \mu(dx) \newline
&= \int \prod_{i=1}^{n} \exp\left(i y_i x_i\right) (\nu \otimes \cdots \otimes \nu)(dx_1, \dots, dx_n) \newline
&= \prod_{i=1}^{n} \int \exp\left(iy_i x_i \right) \nu(dx_i) \newline
&= \prod_{i=1}^{n} \hat{\nu}(y_i) \newline
&= \prod_{i=1}^{n} \exp\left(-\frac{1}{2}y_i^2\right) \newline
&= \exp\left(-\frac{1}{2} \sum_{i=1}^{n} y_i^2 \right) \newline
&= \exp\left(-\frac{1}{2} \langle Iy, y \rangle \right),
\end{align}
where we have used the Fourier transform of the univariate Gaussian measure $\nu$.
We recognize the final expression to be the Fourier transform of a Gaussian measure
with mean vector $0$ and covariance matrix $I$. $\qquad \blacksquare$

**Proof of (7).** Proceeding with the main result, we first show that the
random variable $X := m + AZ$ has law $\mathcal{N}(m, AA^\top)$. This follows
immediately from the above lemma and basic facts about Fourier transforms.
In particular, recall the following properties of Fourier transforms.
Recall that we write $\mathcal{L}(Y)$ to denote the law of a random variable
$Y$, and thus $\hat{\mathcal{L}}(Y)$ is the Fourier transform of this law. We are interested
in the Fourier transform
$$
\hat{\mathcal{L}}(X)
= \hat{\mathcal{L}}(m + AZ),
$$
which is easily derived if one recalls the effect of affine transformations on
Fourier transforms. To be self-contained, we derive the required results here;
let $Y$ be an arbitrary $n$-dimensional random vector, and $m$, $A$ be non-random
as above. Then,  
\begin{align}
\hat{\mathcal{L}}(AY)(x)
&= \mathbb{E}\left[\exp\left(i\langle x, AY\rangle \right) \right]
= \mathbb{E}\left[\exp\left(i\langle A^\top x, Y\rangle \right) \right]  
= \hat{\mathcal{L}}(Y)(A^\top x)
\end{align}
and
\begin{align}
\hat{\mathcal{L}}(m + Y)(x)
&= \mathbb{E}\left[\exp\left(i\langle x, m+Y\rangle \right) \right]  
= \exp\left(i\langle x, m\rangle \right)\mathbb{E}\left[\exp\left(i\langle x, Y\rangle \right) \right]
= \exp\left(i\langle x, m\rangle \right) \hat{\mathcal{L}}(Y)(x).
\end{align}
We combine these two results to the present problem, obtaining
\begin{align}
\hat{\mathcal{L}}(X)(x)
&= \hat{\mathcal{L}}(m + AZ)(x) \newline
&= \exp\left(i\langle x, m\rangle \right) \hat{\mathcal{L}}(Z)(A^\top x) \newline
&= \exp\left(i\langle x, m\rangle \right)\exp\left(-\frac{1}{2}\langle A^\top x, A^\top x\rangle \right) \newline
&= \exp\left(i\langle x, m\rangle \right)\exp\left(-\frac{1}{2}\langle AA^\top x, x\rangle \right) \newline
&= \exp\left(i\langle x, m\rangle - \frac{1}{2}\langle AA^\top x, x\rangle \right),
\end{align}
where we have used the fact

{% endkatexmm %}

## References
1. Gaussian Measures (Vladimir Bogachev)
2. An Introduction to Stochastic PDEs (Martin Hairer)

## TODOs
- Proof that zeros in covariance matrix imply independence.
- Proof that zeros in precision matrix imply conditional independence.  
